# Hello Again

Wow, a lot happened in the past two years #understatement. I generally stopped
writing as I was dealing with adapting to the pandemic. This doesn't mean I
stopped learning; quite the contrary. Some of the things that happened:

## Arch Linux

I gave up trying to manually install Arch, and installed **Manjaro** as a daily
driver. I really, _really_ enjoyed the experience and it was very good for
gaming as well. I ran Manjaro as my main platform for about 6 months. I switched
back to Windows as unfortunately the games I was playing at the time had
terrible DRM that prevented me running it in Linux.

## New Client

I changed clients! I currently work with **iHerb** on their warehouse systems.
Still doing React, but so much has changed in the past two years.

## Principal Consultant
Promotion! I'm now a **Principal Consultant** with Improving, and loving every
minute of it. Contact me on
[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/ericsiebeneich/) if you're looking for a
job and I'll happily make introductions

## React Hooks

**React hooks**. This completely changed the way I write React. I **LOVE**
them and how much more readable React is with them. I actually rewrote large
portions of this site using them because it was painful to look at the old code.

## .NET Core

We're finally there. One unified .NET ecosystem. .NET Framework is slowly
falling out of favor as more and more companies upgrade to .NET Core and it's
fantastic. No more MVC/OWIN problems, Depenency Injection by default, and the
build pipleline actually works without Visual Studio. I think that's my favorite
thing about .NET Core actually. Oh, and it works flawlessly on Linux and easily
with Docker.

## TypeScript

The **TypeScript** tooling is now mature enough to be usable and it's beautiful.
Easy to use, provides strong type checking, and the dynamic types are amazing.
It's currently my favorite type system with the caveat that type erasure is
still a thing. Thankfully that doesn't come up often.

## Kubernetes

I spent a good 6 months learning experimenting with Kubernetes and attempting to
migrate my personal server to k8s. It was both enlightening and a disaster. I
really want it to be good, but the documentation and ecosystem is attrocious.
Outdated documentation, **partial** documentation, documentation tutorials that
don't work on minor version updates to k8s or use broken versions of other
dependencies. Setting up a cluster is a mess, to say the least. Once you get a
cluster up though it is AMAZING to be able to deploy apps so easily.

I currently use [Harbormaster](https://pypi.org/project/docker-harbormaster/) to
manage my server instead while I brood over the cluster setup process of k8s.

## Open Source

I've now published two JavaScript testing related packages,
[jest-gwt](https://www.npmjs.com/package/jest-gwt) and
[gwt-runner](https://www.npmjs.com/package/gwt-runner), and my testing game has
gotten marketably better. I've also contributed to
[moredash](https://www.npmjs.com/package/moredash),
[@material-table/core](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@material-table/core), and
a few more minor changes in other repos. The rush you get from seeing one of
your PRs merged is unreal. Definitely going to keep doing this.

# Conclusion

I'm back, basically. Be on the lookout for updates to the blog, a comment system
powered by [Gitalk](https://github.com/gitalk/gitalk), thoughts on React and
Redux architecture, the Eric onion micro-monolith, and more. See you soon!